# Constraint Programming

## Model

```pl
A,B E {1,2}, C E {1,2,3}
all_distinct(A,B,C)
3A + B + C = 10
```

We set variable domains and use `all_distinct` to filter the domains.

### Domain Consistency

Domain consistency is achieved when we remove all infeasible solutions.

In the case above `C E {,,3}`.

### Propagation

After propagating each new filtered domain, and if we reach a singleton domain (one value per variable) we reach a solution. Therefore, no more propagation is done.

### Search

In case we do not reach a concensus for a certain value, we apply filtering and propagation to all the values the variable can have.

## Global Constraints

Usually global constraints are better to use, since they **exploit problem structure**.

The other version is to use individual constraints, for example:

```pl
A != B
C != B
A != C

vs.

all_distinct(A,B,C)
```

### Representation

A model can be represented by a hyper-graph, where the nodes represent variables (with their domains), and the constraints are (hyper-)edges connecting the nodes.


## Exercise

```
A,B,C E {1,2,3,4,5}
A < 5
B < A
C > B
C < A
```

1. Set up every domain
2. Introduce each of the constraints
   1. Update (filter) the domains, if possible
3. In case we change a domain we propagate the related constraints until no more changes

```
A - 3..4
B - 1..2
C - 2..3
```

## Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP)

- Variables
- Domains
- Constraints

The goal is to satisfy every constraint and reach a solution.

## Constraint Optimization Problem (COP)

COP is a CSP with an added objective function to be optimized (maximized / minimized).

A solution to a COP may be unique, i.e. the only solution that optimizes the problem.

## Concepts

The arity of a constraint is the number of variables it composes.

It is possible to convert a constraint involving *N* variables, to a set of binary contraints.

**Hard Constraints**:
are those that must be met.

**Soft Constraints**:
are those that can be broken. These only exist in COP, and must have a cost associated to breaking them.


