# Constraint Programming (cont)

Next week:
- Topic (scheduling, etc.)

## Complexity Analysis

The difficulty in solving CSPs (and COPs) resides in their exponential complexity.

In a finite domain, d, with n variables, the search space is d^n. This is very limitative for the number of variables and domains we can explore in a reasonable time interval.

### Backtracking vs Forward Checking

In the problem of N Queens, Forward Checking reduces the number of tests and backtracks needed to see that a halt-solution is impossible.

Although in the beginning it did not look like a good solution in the end it would improve our complexity.

## CLP in SICStus Prolog

### Domains

- Boolean:
  - clp(B) Scheme
- Reals and Rationals:
  - clp(Q,R) Scheme
- Finite:
  - clp(FD) Scheme

## CLP(FD) Solver Interface

```
:- use_module(library(clpfd)).
```

- A **finite domain** is a subset of small integers and a **constraint over finite domains** is a relation between a tuple of small integers.

## Structure of a CLP Program

A CLP program is structured in the following three steps:
- Declaration of variables and respective domains
- Declaration of constraints over the variables
- Search for a solution

Example:

```prolog
% variables and domains
A in 1..7,

% constraints
% we need a # for the constraint operation
A + B + C #= A * B * C, 
A #> B,

% search for a solution
% backtracking behind labeling should not be possible, if it happens there is something wrong
labeling([], [A,B,C]).
```

### Variable Domains

- Using the **in/2** and a range of values. The range can be:
  - Constant .. Constant
  - ConstantSet (ex. {1,2,3})
  - ConstantRange /\ ConstantRange
  - ConstantRange \/ ConstantRange
  - \ ConstantRange

- Using the **in_set/2**, which receives a Finite Domain Set.
  - **list_to_fdset(+List, -FD_Set)** transforms a list to a set.

- Using the **domain(+List_of_Variables, +Min, +Max)**.
  - ex: domain([A, B, C], 5, 12)

Note: Try not to use infinite domains, i.e. try to restrict the domains to a finiste set.

### Posting Constraints

Before using labeling, we can see if our constraints are well defined and if variables have valid domains (not necessarily a solution), by just writting the domains and the constraints.

- **fd_batch(+Constraints)** posts a set of constraint at once (in batch).
- **fd_purge(+Variable)** forgets a variable and every constraint associated with it (be careful).

### Materialized (Reified) Constraints

Sometimes it is useful to reflect the truth value of a constraint into a boolean variable B (0/1).

Example:
- Constraint #<=> B.
- If the constraint is met, B assumes the value of 1, and 0 otherwise.

```prolog
% implement exactly(X, L, N) which returns True if X occurs N times in L

exactly(_, [], 0).
exactly(X, [Y|L], N):-
    X #= Y #<=> B, % we use materialized constraints in domain so that variables are not instanciated
    N #= M + B,
    exactly(X, L, M).
```

## Available Constraints

- Arithmetic Constraints
- Membership Constraints (used to define domains)
- Propositional Constraints
- Combinatorial Constraints
  - Arithmetic-Logical
  - Scheduling
  - Placement
  - Graph
  - Sequence
  - Extensional

In arithmetic constraints it is better to use linear expressions rather than using *divisions* or *mods*, prolog blocks until the lower value is ground. In case a division is used, pass it to a multiplication.

Better to use global constraints like *sum*, *scalar_product*, *minimum*, *maximum*, *if_then_else*, *all_distinct*, *all_distinct_except_0*, ... (see slides, CLP in SICStus Prolog).

